README.md, before:

<img src="img/logo_amds.png" alt="Logo" height="128px"/>

# Welcome
AmsterdamUMCdb is the first freely accessible European intensive care database. It is endorsed by the European Society of Intensive Care Medicine (ESICM) and its Data Science Section. It contains de-identified health data related to tens of thousands of intensive care unit admissions, including demographics, vital signs, laboratory tests and medications.

# Version
The current version of AmsterdamUMCdb is 1.0.2, released in March 2020. This version contains data related to 23,106 intensive care unit and high dependency unit admissions of adult patients from 2003-2016. The first version of AmsterdamUMCdb (1.0) was released in November 2019.

# Requesting Access
The database, although de-identified, still contains detailed information regarding the clinical care of patients, so must be treated with appropriate care and respect and cannot be shared without permission. To request access, go to the [Amsterdam Medical Data Science](https://amsterdammedicaldatascience.nl/) website.

# Acknowledgement
When using AmsterdamUMCdb in your research, please cite:

Thoral, P. J., Peppink, J. M., Driessen, R. H., Sijbrands, E. J. G., Kompanje, E. J. O., Kaplan, L., Bailey, H., Kesecioglu, J., Cecconi, M., Churpek, M., Clermont, G., van der Schaar, M., Ercole, A., Girbes, A. R. J., Elbers, P. W. G., on behalf of the Amsterdam University Medical Centers Database (AmsterdamUMCdb) Collaborators and the SCCM/ESICM Joint Data Science Task Force (2021). Sharing ICU Patient Data Responsibly Under the Society of Critical Care Medicine/European Society of Intensive Care Medicine Joint Data Science Collaboration: The Amsterdam University Medical Centers Database (AmsterdamUMCdb) Example. Critical Care Medicine, Online First. https://doi.org/10.1097/CCM.0000000000004916

# Facts and Figures
The current database contains data from the clinical patient data management system of the department of Intensive Care, a mixed medical-surgical ICU, from Amsterdam University Medical Center. The clinical data contains 23,106 admissions of 20,109 patients admitted from 2003 to 2016 with a total of almost 1.0 billion clinical observations consisting of vitals, clinical scoring systems, device data and lab results data and nearly 5.0 million medication records.

<img src="img/plot_admissions_year.png" alt="Admissions per year category" height="512px"/>
<img src="img/plot_admissions_age.png" alt="Admission per age category" height="512px"/>

# Available tables
The table and field definitions are available from the [AmsterdamUMCdb wiki](https://github.com/AmsterdamUMC/AmsterdamUMCdb/wiki) and from Jupyter Notebooks in the [tables](tables/) folder.

|Table name|Description|
|:---|:---|
|[admissions](https://github.com/AmsterdamUMC/AmsterdamUMCdb/wiki/admissions)|admissions and demographic data of the patients admitted to the ICU or MCU|
|[drugitems](https://github.com/AmsterdamUMC/AmsterdamUMCdb/wiki/drugitems)|medication orders including fluids, (parenteral) feeding and blood transfusions during the stay on the ICU|
|[freetextitems](https://github.com/AmsterdamUMC/AmsterdamUMCdb/wiki/freetextitems)|observations, including laboratory results, that are based on non-numeric (text) data|
|[listitems](https://github.com/AmsterdamUMC/AmsterdamUMCdb/wiki/listitems)|categorial observations, e.g. based on a selection from a list, like type of heart rhytm, ventilatory mode, etc.|
|[numericitems](https://github.com/AmsterdamUMC/AmsterdamUMCdb/wiki/numericitems)| numerical measurements and observations, including vital parameters, data from medical devices, lab results, outputs from drains and foley-catheters, scores etc.|
|[procedureorderitems](https://github.com/AmsterdamUMC/AmsterdamUMCdb/wiki/procedureorderitems)|procedures and tasks, such as performing a chest X-ray, drawing blood and daily ICU nursing care and scoring|
|[processitems](https://github.com/AmsterdamUMC/AmsterdamUMCdb/wiki/processitems)|catheters, drains, tubes, and continous non-medication processes (e.g. renal replacement therapy, hypothermia induction, etc.)|

# amsterdamumcdb Python package
The `amsterdamumcdb` Python package contains common functions for working with the database.

## Available functions
### *amsterdamumcdb*.get_dictionary():
Gets a dictionary of all items in Amsterdam UMCdb, with (work in progress) translated 
medical concepts.

+ Returns:
    + dataframe containing dictionary

### *amsterdamumcdb*.get_fluidbalance(admissionid, from_date, to_date, con):
Calculate the fluid balance (i.e. fluid input - fluid output) for a specific time interval.
Typically this will be used to calculate daily fluid balances.

+ Arguments:
    + admissionid -- the admissionid of ICU admission 
    + from_date -- the start of the interval, expressed as the number of milliseconds from start of this ICU admission
    + to_date -- the end of the interval, expressed as the number of milliseconds from start of this ICU admission 
    + con -- psycopg2 connection or pandas-gbq Google BigQuery config

### *amsterdamumcdb*.outliers_histogram(data, z_threshold=4.0, lower=None, upper=None, bins=None, binwidth=None, maxbins=None):
Return a pyplot histogram, where the upper and/or lower outliers are
binned together for a more even distribution plot. By default, the histogram will be created with bins that are on
boundaries aligned with the pyplot axis ticks.

+ Arguments:
  + data -- dataframe to create the histogram for.
  + z_threshold (Optional) -- number of standard deviations from the median to determine outliers
  + lower (Optional) -- lower threshold for binning lower outliers together
  + upper (Optional) -- upper threshold for binning higher outliers together
  + bins (Optional) -- int or sequence or str, allows specifying the number of bins, the actual bins or a binning strategy
            (see: https://matplotlib.org/stable/api/_as_gen/matplotlib.pyplot.hist.html)
  + binwidth (Optional) -- forces a specified size of the equally sized bins between the lower and upper threshold
  + maxbins -- the maximum number of equally sized bins to create
    
## Changelog
### version 0.1.3
+ Improves binning in `outliers_histogram()`
### version 0.1.2
+ Allows negative dates in `get_fluidbalance()` 
### version 0.1.1
+ Fixes Google BigQuery `Project must be a string` error.
### version 0.1.0
+ initial release for ESICM Datathon 20201

Commit message:

fix apache ii score calculation
- fixes sodium score calculation (129-130 boundary)
- fixes temperature correction for invalid entries > 100 (division by 10 instead of 100)
- Uses amsterdamumcdb.get_dictionary() instead requiring running ../../dictionaries/create_dictionaries.ipynb before apache calculation
- reduce dpi of images for faster loading
- update figures with most recent histogram function
- improves binning and fixes binning when all values < 1

Co-Authored-By: alexfabregat <34720688+alexfabregat@users.noreply.github.com>

README.md, after:

<img src="img/logo_amds.png" alt="Logo" height="128px"/>

# Welcome
AmsterdamUMCdb is the first freely accessible European intensive care database. It is endorsed by the European Society of Intensive Care Medicine (ESICM) and its Data Science Section. It contains de-identified health data related to tens of thousands of intensive care unit admissions, including demographics, vital signs, laboratory tests and medications.

# Version
The current version of AmsterdamUMCdb is 1.0.2, released in March 2020. This version contains data related to 23,106 intensive care unit and high dependency unit admissions of adult patients from 2003-2016. The first version of AmsterdamUMCdb (1.0) was released in November 2019.

# Requesting Access
The database, although de-identified, still contains detailed information regarding the clinical care of patients, so must be treated with appropriate care and respect and cannot be shared without permission. To request access, go to the [Amsterdam Medical Data Science](https://amsterdammedicaldatascience.nl/) website.

# Acknowledgement
When using AmsterdamUMCdb in your research, please cite:

Thoral, P. J., Peppink, J. M., Driessen, R. H., Sijbrands, E. J. G., Kompanje, E. J. O., Kaplan, L., Bailey, H., Kesecioglu, J., Cecconi, M., Churpek, M., Clermont, G., van der Schaar, M., Ercole, A., Girbes, A. R. J., Elbers, P. W. G., on behalf of the Amsterdam University Medical Centers Database (AmsterdamUMCdb) Collaborators and the SCCM/ESICM Joint Data Science Task Force (2021). Sharing ICU Patient Data Responsibly Under the Society of Critical Care Medicine/European Society of Intensive Care Medicine Joint Data Science Collaboration: The Amsterdam University Medical Centers Database (AmsterdamUMCdb) Example. Critical Care Medicine, Online First. https://doi.org/10.1097/CCM.0000000000004916

# Facts and Figures
The current database contains data from the clinical patient data management system of the department of Intensive Care, a mixed medical-surgical ICU, from Amsterdam University Medical Center. The clinical data contains 23,106 admissions of 20,109 patients admitted from 2003 to 2016 with a total of almost 1.0 billion clinical observations consisting of vitals, clinical scoring systems, device data and lab results data and nearly 5.0 million medication records.

<img src="img/plot_admissions_year.png" alt="Admissions per year category" height="512px"/>
<img src="img/plot_admissions_age.png" alt="Admission per age category" height="512px"/>

# Available tables
The table and field definitions are available from the [AmsterdamUMCdb wiki](https://github.com/AmsterdamUMC/AmsterdamUMCdb/wiki) and from Jupyter Notebooks in the [tables](tables/) folder.

|Table name|Description|
|:---|:---|
|[admissions](https://github.com/AmsterdamUMC/AmsterdamUMCdb/wiki/admissions)|admissions and demographic data of the patients admitted to the ICU or MCU|
|[drugitems](https://github.com/AmsterdamUMC/AmsterdamUMCdb/wiki/drugitems)|medication orders including fluids, (parenteral) feeding and blood transfusions during the stay on the ICU|
|[freetextitems](https://github.com/AmsterdamUMC/AmsterdamUMCdb/wiki/freetextitems)|observations, including laboratory results, that are based on non-numeric (text) data|
|[listitems](https://github.com/AmsterdamUMC/AmsterdamUMCdb/wiki/listitems)|categorial observations, e.g. based on a selection from a list, like type of heart rhytm, ventilatory mode, etc.|
|[numericitems](https://github.com/AmsterdamUMC/AmsterdamUMCdb/wiki/numericitems)| numerical measurements and observations, including vital parameters, data from medical devices, lab results, outputs from drains and foley-catheters, scores etc.|
|[procedureorderitems](https://github.com/AmsterdamUMC/AmsterdamUMCdb/wiki/procedureorderitems)|procedures and tasks, such as performing a chest X-ray, drawing blood and daily ICU nursing care and scoring|
|[processitems](https://github.com/AmsterdamUMC/AmsterdamUMCdb/wiki/processitems)|catheters, drains, tubes, and continous non-medication processes (e.g. renal replacement therapy, hypothermia induction, etc.)|

# amsterdamumcdb Python package
The `amsterdamumcdb` Python package contains common functions for working with the database.

## Available functions
### *amsterdamumcdb*.get_dictionary():
Gets a dictionary of all items in Amsterdam UMCdb, with (work in progress) translated 
medical concepts.

+ Returns:
    + dataframe containing dictionary

### *amsterdamumcdb*.get_fluidbalance(admissionid, from_date, to_date, con):
Calculate the fluid balance (i.e. fluid input - fluid output) for a specific time interval.
Typically this will be used to calculate daily fluid balances.

+ Arguments:
    + admissionid -- the admissionid of ICU admission 
    + from_date -- the start of the interval, expressed as the number of milliseconds from start of this ICU admission
    + to_date -- the end of the interval, expressed as the number of milliseconds from start of this ICU admission 
    + con -- psycopg2 connection or pandas-gbq Google BigQuery config

### *amsterdamumcdb*.outliers_histogram(data, z_threshold=4.0, lower=None, upper=None, bins=None, binwidth=None, maxbins=None):
Return a pyplot histogram, where the upper and/or lower outliers are
binned together for a more even distribution plot. By default, the histogram will be created with bins that are on
boundaries aligned with the pyplot axis ticks.

+ Arguments:
  + data -- dataframe to create the histogram for.
  + z_threshold (Optional) -- number of standard deviations from the median to determine outliers
  + lower (Optional) -- lower threshold for binning lower outliers together
  + upper (Optional) -- upper threshold for binning higher outliers together
  + bins (Optional) -- int or sequence or str, allows specifying the number of bins, the actual bins or a binning strategy
            (see: https://matplotlib.org/stable/api/_as_gen/matplotlib.pyplot.hist.html)
  + binwidth (Optional) -- forces a specified size of the equally sized bins between the lower and upper threshold
  + maxbins -- the maximum number of equally sized bins to create
    
## Changelog
### version 0.1.4
- fixes binning in `outliers_histogram()` when all values < 1
### version 0.1.3
+ Improves binning in `outliers_histogram()`
### version 0.1.2
+ Allows negative dates in `get_fluidbalance()` 
### version 0.1.1
+ Fixes Google BigQuery `Project must be a string` error.
### version 0.1.0
+ initial release for ESICM Datathon 2021
